##原文
###1.Introduction          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
    The realization of controlled thermonuclear fusion could lead to a significant                       
    contribution to future energy demands.                                                                                  
    The reaction between the fuel components tritium and deuterium requires                      
    temperatures above 10 8 K so that anyconfinement using solid walls is excluded.                 
    
    At these temperatures the fuels are ionized and form an electrically highly conducting        
    plasma that can be confined by strong magnetic fields to a defined volume.                              
    
    During the past decades different concepts of magnetic confinement have been                
    investigated and a number of conceptual designs for commercial or experimental                
    fusion reactors havebeen studied.
    
    One of those is the linear magnetic confinement in a very long solenoid (up                         
    to 130 m [1]).
    For strong enough magnetic fields, charged plasma particles are                                             
    spiraling freely along the field lines from which they cannot escape.           
    
    At bothends of the linear solenoid the plasma is compressed by stronger magnetic                
    fields created by coils of special shape (called the mirror).                  
                                        
    Particles which move not primarily parallel to the field lines are reflected at the ends,        
    othersmay leave the confinement at the ends.                                                                            
    
    A major part of the kinetic energy of  escaping charged particles can be                                  
    directly converted into electric energy.
    
    In order to avoid the very complicated mirrors it is a straightforward idea                            
    to bend the former geometry and to connect both ends.                                                            
    
    Magnetic field lines,along which charged particles move, become closed and                            
    the confined plasma fills a torus. 
    
    The primary magnetic field required for plasma confinement has toroidal orientation.          
    
    The best-established machine with toroidal confinement is the Tokamak in which a                  
    toroidal electric current is driven around the doughnut-shaped plasma.                                          
    
    The toroidal currents induce a secondary, poloidalmagnetic field, which in                               
    superposition with the primary one generates nested  toroidal magnetic surfaces.                 
    
    The field lines follow a helical path on those surfaces as they wind around the torus.              
    Tokamaks have proven their capabilities for fusion confinement in a number of                   
    experiments in several countries, from which the most prominent is probably the                 
    Joint European Torus experiment
    S. Molokov et al. (eds.), Magnetohydrodynamics – Historical Evolution and Trends,                 
    c 2007 Springer.
    171–194. 172
    L. Bühler
    
    (JET) in Culham, UK, in which in 1991 the worlds first controlled release of
    deuterium–tritium fusion power of 1.7 MW was realized.
    
    Two years later the US experiment, the Tritium-fueled Fusion Test Reactor (TFTR) 
    at Princeton generated 6 and later 10 MW. 
    
    In 1997, JET was able to produce more that 16 MW and the upcoming international   
    thermonuclear experimental reactor (ITER) will beat all prior experiments by orders 
    of magnitude in fusion power, confinement time, and capital investment.
    
    Primarily designed as aphysics experiment, ITER will also provide the opportunity 
    to test a number of engineering components, which are essential elements of
    future thermonuclear fusion power plants, including liquid metal breeding blankets.
    
    A blanket is the solid structure that is positioned between the plasma and
    the magnetic coils in order to shield or protect the latter ones from intolerable
    radiation doses.
    
    Moreover, the blanket has two other functions which are the
    absorption of fast neutrons, conversion of their energy into heat, and breeding
    of tritium, one of the fuel components.
    
    The plasma-facing wall called the first wall receives a high heat flux emitted 
    from the fusion plasma. 
    The major heat input to the blanket occurs by volumetric 
    heating due to strong neutron radiation. 
    
    To ensure safe, reliable operation, all heat released in the blanket
    has to be removed at such rates that wall temperatures do not exceed critical
    values.
    
    Various engineering concepts have been discussed in the past with the  aim to 
    achieve sufficient cooling by using liquid metals such as lithium or the
    eutectic lithiumlead alloy as possible coolants. 
    
    In principle, liquid metals are prime candidates for coolants. 
    They can be operated at high temperature, they have high thermal conductivity, 
    and due to the lithium content the coolant  serves simultaneously as a 
    material for the tritium breeding. 
    
    Blankets which rely exclusively on the heat transfer capabilities of liquid metals 
    are  known as self-cooled liquid metal blankets. 
    
    In other concepts the liquid metal serves only  as breeder material while the
    heat is removed by coolants like water or helium  gas at high pressure.
    
    We will call those concepts separately-cooled liquid metal blankets. 
    
    A combination of both ideas results in the so-called dual coolant  blankets, 
    where the strong heat flux from the first wall (and from other walls)
    is removed by helium, while the volumetrically deposited heat is removed by
    the liquid metal flow. 
    
    It would be impossible to address here all individual concepts that appeared 
    during the last three decades. 
    In the following we will outline some specific features of different blanket
    types illustrated by examples.
        
    The magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) issues for applications in fusion have
    been discussed in the past by numerous authors and one should recall here, for
    example, the reports by Hunt and Hancox [2], Lielausis [3], Hunt and Holroyd
    [4]. 
    
    These reports and references cited there highlight all major aspects concerning 
    liquid-metal MHD in a fusion environment and most results presented
    there serve up to now as a fundamental basis for the evaluation of new designs.
    
    ###2.Formulation
    The presentation of governing equations follows closely the textbook by Müller
    and Bühler [5] focusing on fusion-specific aspects. Details of solution proce-
    dures may be found in that reference or in original papers cited therein. The
    discussion concentrates exclusively on MHD-related issues and omits such
    important topics as heat transfer, tritium breeding, and corrosion.
    2.1 Governing Equations
    For applications in fusion blankets MHD equations in the inductionless limit
    are preferred. With this assumption the magnetic field is a known quantity
    that does not depend on the flow. The nondimensional inductionless equations
    for an incompressible viscous fluid consist of the momentum balance
    
    公式图片(1)
and Ohm’s law
j = −∇φ + v × B,
(2)
with conservation of mass and charge
∇ · v = 0, ∇ · j = 0.
(3)
    Here, v, B, j, p, and φ stand for velocity, applied magnetic field, current
    density, pressure, and electric potential, scaled by the reference velocity v 0 ,
    the magnitude of the applied magnetic field B 0 , j 0 = σv 0 B 0 , p 0 = Lσv 0 B 0 2 ,
    and φ 0 = Lv 0 B 0 , respectively. 
    
    The typical geometric dimension of the ductcross section is denoted by L and the 
    fluid properties like density ρ, electric conductivity σ, and kinematic viscosity ν are 
    assumed to be constant.
    
    Inductionless models are valid in general for low magnetic Reynolds numbers
    R m = μσv 0 L  1, with magnetic permeability μ, but they can be applied
    even to cases with higher R m provided that R m O (j)  1, where O (j) rep-
    resents the order of magnitude of nondimensional current density in the fluid
    (as outlined, e.g., by Walker (1986) [6]).
    
    The two nondimensional groups are the interaction parameter and the
Hartmann number,

    which characterize the ratios (electromagnetic/inertia forces) and (electro-
    magnetic/viscous forces) 1/2 , respectively. 
    The hydrodynamic Reynolds number is given in terms of these groups as Re = Ha 2 /N .
    The boundary conditions at the fluid–wall interface Γ are
    
Fig. 1. Sketch of layers for Ha 
 1
    where n is the inward unit normal to the wall and j w the current density
    in the wall. For smooth walls of conductivity σ w , whose thickness t is small
    compared with L, the local current entering the wall is discharged into the
    thin wall in a quasi two-dimensional (2D) way. To describe this behavior the
    charge conservation equation is integrated across the wall which leads to the
    thin-wall condition


    is the wall conductance parameter, φ w stands for the dimenwhere c = σ σL
    
    sionless wall potential defined at the fluid–wall interface and the subscript τ
    denotes components tangential to the wall [7]. 
    Currents leaving the fluid enter the wall, turn in the wall into a tangential direction, and create in the wall a
    distribution of wall potential. 
    For applications in fusion blankets, the metal walls are usually assumed to be perfectly 
    wetted by the fluid with φ w = φ.
    However, in order to minimize pressure drop some design concepts propose the
    use of thin insulating coatings of thickness δ i with resistivity ρ i between the fluid and the wall.
    
     As reported by Bühler and Molokov [8], the wall potential is then related to the fluid potential by
(7)
    with the nondimensional contact resistance κ = ρ i δ i σ/L .
    
    
    2.2 Conditions in fusion blankets
    Prime candidates for breeder and/or coolants in fusion blankets are pure
    lithium and the eutectic lithium lead alloy Pb-17Li. The material properties
    are given in Table 1 for a temperature of 450 ◦ C which is a typical tempera-
    ture for applications in fusion blankets.
     For comparison, the values of FLIBE  (LiF-34BeF 2 ) at 500 ◦ C, which has 
     been considered as another liquid breeder or coolant, has been added to the table. 
     The liquid metals are superior to the latter material in breeding ratio,
      thermal conductivity and lower viscosity so that FLIBE never was a real alternative. 
    With these properties we may estimate the controlling nondimensional groups for geometries with L = 0.05 m,
    B = 10 T , and v 0 = 0.5 m/s.
    
    
    We observe that for the liquid metals used in fusion blankets the Hartmann
    number is very high, Ha  1, i.e., the electromagnetic forces dominate over theLiquid Metal Magnetohydrodynamics for Fusion Blankets
    
    
    
    
    
    175
    Table 1. Physical properties of liquid breeder materials
    viscous ones. As a consequence, the fluid moves quasi inviscidly through cores
    which occupy most of the blanket. The core flow establishes a balance between
    pressure gradient and Lorentz force. Viscous effects are confined to thin layers,
    as shown in Fig. 1. The viscous layers at walls to which the magnetic field
    has a normal component
     are the Hartmann layers. They are very thin and
    
    scale as δ H = O Ha −1 . Layers at walls parallel to the field are the parallel
    

    layers or the side layers whose thickness scales as δ s = O Ha −1/2 . One
    could dedicate such layers to Arthur Shercliff who investigated first the flows
    in parallel layers for insulating rectangular ducts in 1953 [9], but one should
    also remember in this context the name of Julian Hunt who demonstrated in
    1965 the possible occurrence of high-velocity jets in such layers, depending on
    the conductivity of the walls [10].
    Layers between different cores are known as Ludford layers. They originate
    from discontinuities of either geometrical or electrical properties at the walls
    like corners, different conductivities or thicknesses of walls, etc. and spread
    into the fluid along magnetic field lines. In the viscous-electromagnetic

 regime
    these layers scale in thickness like Shercliff’s layers, i.e. δ L = O Ha −1/2 ,
    provided that Ha  Re 2 [11]. The latter condition is hardly met in self-cooled
    fusion applications.
    Inspection of the interaction parameter N in Table 1 tells us that inertia
    forces are fairly small compared with electromagnetic forces, at least in the
    cores. However, inertia may play a role for flows of heavy alloys like Pb-
    17Li or in pure Pb, preferentially in side layers of Hunt’s type, where the
    velocity in the jets may exceed the mean velocity by orders of magnitude.
    Moreover, inertia will affect essentially the Ludford layers between
    cores
 and

    as a consequence they will change their thickness to δ L = O N −1/3 in the
    inertial-electromagnetic regime, if Re 1/2  Ha  Re 2 [11].
    The values for N and Re given in Table 1 have been evaluated for a
    velocity that is typical for self-cooled blankets. Velocities in separately cooled
    blankets can be smaller at least by two orders of magnitude which increases
    N or decreases Re by more than two orders of magnitude compared to the
    values shown above. Under such conditions one comes closer to a viscous-
    electromagnetic balance in Ludford layers of Li blankets but flows of Pb-17Li
    in such layers will remain inertial.176
    L. Bühler
    Finally, it should be mentioned that the main effect of a strong magnetic
    field is the formation of uniform flow conditions in the cores and that tur-
    bulent fluctuations, if they were carried into the field, are damped out very
    quickly. This leads to laminar MHD flows even far beyond the hydrodynamic
    thresholds for the onset of turbulent motion. This observation facilitates the
    analysis on one hand, but reduces the heat transfer capabilities to that of
    laminar flows.
    2.3 Analysis
    For numerical analyses of three-dimensional (3D) MHD flows it is often useful
    to eliminate currents from the momentum equation and Ohm’s law which
    yields


1
1 ∂
+ (v · ∇) v = −∇p +
∇ 2 v − B 2 v ⊥ + B × ∇φ,
(8)
N ∂t
Ha 2
∇ 2 φ = ∇ · (v × B) ,
(9)
    where v ⊥ represents the velocity components in the plane perpendicular to
    the direction of the externally applied magnetic field. The first equation is
    a standard one present in many commercially available fluid dynamics codes
    with a source term B × ∇φ to be modeled by the user. The second equation
    is a diffusion-type equation for determining the potential φ as an additional
    scalar variable with the source term ∇ · (v × B). Examples of the use of
    commercial software for solving MHD problems for fusion applications are
    described, e.g., by DiPiazza and Ciofalo (2002) [12] or by Kharicha et al.
    (2004) [13]. A number of academic codes has been developed, which make
    use of the MHD equations in the form (8) and (9). Among them are, e.g.,
    Myasnikov and Kalyutik (1997) [14], Sterl (1990) [15], and the list goes back
    at least to Aitov et al. (1979) [16] and Schumann (1976) [17].
    However, until today, neither commercial nor academic codes are able to
    simulate pressure-driven 3D MHD flows in the relevant parameter range for
    Ha and N with sufficient accuracy. A major problem here is that important
    phenomena happen on different scales but have to be resolved simultaneously.
    For example, the flow in the core varies on length scales of the order of one,
    while essential properties of the flow are determined in the very thin Hartmann
    layers or in the parallel layers which are a bit thicker. The proper resolution
    of these layers is a key issue for the correct computation of pressure drop,
    since these layers, together with the adjacent walls, determine the electric
    resistance for current loops, limit the current density in the core and the
    pressure drop. Moreover, together with the thin-wall condition (6) for c  1,
    and thus relevant in fusion applications, the discretized numerical problem in
    terms of linear algebraic equations looses its diagonal dominance and becomes
    finally ill-conditioned with severe consequences on convergence and numerical
    stability of the codes.Liquid Metal Magnetohydrodynamics for Fusion Blankets
    177
    2.4 Approximations for strong magnetic fields
    For high Hartmann numbers, Ha  1, one may consider the flow in the cores
    as being inviscid and exclude viscous Hartmann layers from the numerical
    simulation of the core flow. The solution in Hartmann layers is well known
    from asymptotic considerations (see, e.g., Moreau who describes in 1990 the
    detailed properties of Hartmann layers [18]) so that we can take them into
    account in an integral manner. The most important aspect of the Hartmann
    layers is their ability to provide a path where currents may close. This modifies
    the thin-wall condition (6) to
    j c ·n = −
    ∂φ
    = ∇ · [(c + δ) ∇ τ φ w ] at Γ,
    ∂n
    (10)
    −1
    stands for the local dimensionless thickness of
    where δ = (Ha |n · B|)
    the Hartmann layer. This formulation has been used by Bühler (1995) [19].
    A condition valid for insulating walls has been given by Walker et al.
    (1971) [20]. The kinematic boundary condition applied to the inviscid core
    now requires v c ·n =0, which is a sufficient condition for inviscid flows. This
    approximation is valid at walls which are not parallel to the magnetic field.
    Applications to circular ducts become inaccurate in Roberts layers, in the
    neighborhood of lines where the magnetic field is tangential to the wall.
    However, since this region is small, the influence on the core velocity, flow
    rate, or pressure drop is negligible at high Hartmann numbers [21, 22].
    Equations (8)–(10) are frequently used either for numerical simulation of
    channel flow or as the basis of asymptotic analyses. A general modeling of
    near-wall layers for numerical simulations of MHD flows has been outlined by
    Widlund (2003) [23].
    Inertial forces in the cores of fusion blankets are often negligible compared
    to Lorentz forces for N  1. This leads us to Kulikovskii’s magnetostatic
    approximation published in 1968 [24]. This ingenious approach has inspired
    a number of researchers in the past for evaluation of MHD flows in fusion
    blankets, where it was sometimes called the core flow approximation (see, e.g.,
    [22, 25, 26]). Bühler [19] describes in 1995 the implementation of Kulikovskii’s
    approach into a numerical code using tensor notation with boundary fitted
    coordinates. The coordinate transformation
    
    
    
    
    z ,
    (11)
    x = x
     ̄ u 1 , u 2 + h u 1 , u 2 u 3 ˆ
    which is illustrated in Fig. 2, maps the computational volume defined by the
    coordinates u 1 , u 2 , u 3 onto the physical space in terms of coordinates x, y, z.
    The momentum equation with mass conservation and Ohm’s law with con-
    servation of charge now read as
    
    
    ∂ i p = V b ik j k ,
    (12)
    ∂ k V v k = 0,
    
    
    (13)
    j i = −∂ i φ + V b ik v k , ∂ k V j k = 0,178
    L. Bühler
    Fig. 2. Sketch of the mapping used to describe boundary- and magnetic field- fitted
    coordinates
    where V b ik j k and V b ik v k stand for the Lorentz force and induced electric
    field, and the antisymmetric tensor b ik represents the interaction with the
    magnetic field. These equations can be integrated analytically along field lines
    according to Kulikovskii’s
     approach, where the two integration functions,
    
     aside
    
    from pressure p u 1 , u 2 , are taken as the wall potentials φ ± u 1 , u 2 at the
    upper and lower walls at u 3 = ±1. The wall potentials are determined from
    the thin-wall condition (10) in the form
    
    
    (14)
    V j 3 = ∓∂ k (c + δ) Ag ki ∂ i φ ± .
    Once the 2D pressure and wall potentials are obtained it is straightforward
    to evaluate all the 3D properties of the MHD flow by analytical relations.
    The numerical code based on Eqs. (12)–(14) can be applied to calculate MHD
    flows in nearly arbitrary geometries, for spatially varying magnetic fields, con-
    ducting and insulating walls, walls with contact resistance, and it performs
    best for high Hartmann numbers.
    3 Self-cooled liquid-metal blankets
    In the following, some liquid-metal blankets are outlined that have been pro-
    moted during the last decades of fusion research and key issues concerning the
    liquid-metal flow are briefly discussed. Let us start the presentation with self-
    cooled blankets. The use of the same fluid as both tritium breeder and coolant
    greatly simplifies design and materials considerations. There are important
    constraints related to the use of liquid metals in the blanket of a fusion reac-
    tor. For example, compatibility between the coolant and structural material
    limits the allowable coolant–wall interface temperature and the reactivity of
    lithium with air and water is an important design hazard [27].
    